Title: An introduction to decision-making
Date: 2016-09-09

When asked about decision-making, it is natural for people to talk about the slow deliberation of choosing between items or options in exchange for assets such as money, time or energy. Expectations are essential to this process. Humans must forecast the costs and benefits associated with specific options in advance of knowing outcomes and use this information to facilitate their goals and survival. Whilst this sounds straight forward, many people claim that they are not very good at making decisions. This might be true. You might decide to buy a house only to find a year later that it is worth less than you paid. You might decide not to wear a coat and then get caught out in a storm. You might change your mind depending on the presentation and not content of decision information. On the other hand, research has shown that humans are remarkably efficient at making decisions. We are able to learn and update reward predictions based on prior experience, form decisions based on what we think others are thinking, classify simple events in under a quarter of a second and weight choices based on uncertainty in our environment. 

So which is it: Are we good or bad at making decisions? The aim of this article is to take steps towards answering this question. It begins by defining and then questioning the existence of decisions and whether it is possible to prove that they exist. Key theories and findings in the decision-making literature are then summarised. This covers a range of scenarios, from the fast classification of sensory information (such as deciding whether a cup is green or blue), to navigating through a busy square, to the more complex and drawn out process of deciding whether to switch jobs, go skydiving or hire an employee.

Time is essential to this debate. To understand what decisions are we must question our assumptions. We must analyse human behaviour at different levels and timeframes to find structural and computational similarities that can be used for understanding and prediction. Once found, this knowledge can be used to facilitate goals, enhance technological design and make us all more understanding of the human condition and why we move the way that we do.

ARTICLE CURRENTLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION. PLEASE COME BACK AT A LATER DATE - dcg